Truth. Using logic to model the world of human perception
===


> "Hello, and welcome to another episode of "Logic for Y'all". Today we are going to tackle a rather controversial topic - using logic to model the world as it is perceived by us humans. Asked to comment on it, most people went: "Pff, logic!" and our resident logicians prepared the following summary: "Pff, the real world!". But still among our listeners there were some wannabe philosophers who insisted that this is the most important thing ever so it appears that we have no choice but to talk about it for some time (there will be booze at the end). So can we please give a warm welcome to the only guy who agreed to speak about this rubbish topic, Boris Marinoooov!"

Logic is a pretty misunderstood topic. It was originaly conceived as a way to model our thoughts so they are always correct (I think). Then some people tried to use it as a basis for describing mathematics. When (two thousand years after its inception) it was discovered that logic can be used for making computers, it was finaly useful. But due to that, we find logic shifting away from its original purpose. 

Trying to use logic to analyse an everyday conversation will reveal at once why this is the case - most of the think we say are neither logically sound, nor we expect or want them to be. What is a *logical* conversation anyways? Given a set of assumptions and a set rules for manipulating these assumptions, you can use logic to generate some other assumptions. So a logical conversation would be something like:

> "Hm, it rained today. And had to go outside, so I got wet."
> "People get wet when it rains and they don't carry an umbrella. I guess you forgot your umbrella."

In other words, logic covers a very small amount of the things that a human being will ever say, if any. In this text, I will attempt to find out why it is the case and try to extend logic so it can succeed in covering some more cases. 

In search of True and False
===

In classical logic, True/False is an inherent characteristic of of each and every thing that we say. This is not at all how our perceptions and thoughts work - we constantly say (and think) things that are neither true nor false (or are somewhere in between). In constructive logic (or "Intuitionistic logic"as it is also called) things are a bit more "realistic" - True and False are just assertions like anything else and there can be statements which are neither True or False. For this reason I would pick constructive logic as a basis of our logical framework.

If we are going to use constructive type of logic for modelling the world (and even if we aren't), we have to pick the core assertion or assertions that imply Truth, else we wouldn't really be able to say anything. These assertions (or assertion) will act as the "seed" of our logical framework and everything else will follow from it. Let's take, for example, the following statement (which I'd argue is pretty much the initial seed of our thinking too): "everything that I see with my own eyes is true". From this it would follow that, for example, it is true that I am a human being, it is true that I am sitting in front of a computer etc. (I can see that I am standing in front a computer *and* everything I see is true, *therefore* I am sitting in front of a computer) etc. 

There are many statements that we cannot verify with our own eyes but we consider "true", like mathematical statements, for example (simpler math statements like 1 + 1 = 2 may reside in the visible spectre, but there is no way to "see" that the square root of 2 is irrationa, for example). Depending on your background, you may consider mathematics anything between, the language of nature which is the closest thing we have to real truth, or just a load of bullcrap which is created by people who want to look smart, but one thing is for certain - mathematical statements are not true *in the same way* as statements about everyday objects that we see - "1 + 1 = 2." is not true in the same way as "My shirt is blue." and I think that the reason for this is that real-life thinking relies on not just one or several sources of truth, (and, as we shall see later, actuallly the whole unique characteristic of thinking arises from the way in which those systems connect). 

Our power to observe stuff is maybe the biggest source of truth, and the basis of our understanding, but it is definitely not absolute. Furthermore, there are an infinite number of other sources, such as truth based on scienses, not to mention ones based on belief (and by belief I don't mean just religious belief (of which just a portion of people are relying to), but belief in authorities on which all people rely). Not all of these sources have to be so official as "Mathematically True" or "True as Observed" (or even as "It's in the Bible") - there are also stuff as trivial as "My Father Told me so", "Stuff that If True would mean I am Cool" and so on. Each of these sets of assertions disciplines comes with its own version of the "True" object from which everything else follows. 

To complete our system, we should connect all those contexts with one another. Probably the easiest way to do so by featuring one object, called something like "Universal truth" from which all other truths would follow. Adding such object to our framework will effectively make all other truth objects subordinate to this one (they have to follow from it, in order to be truth objects at all), which will make our framework much more organised and neat - it is no wonder that search for the universal truth is ongoing. It would mean that if, for example, we take X as the universal truth, then anything that does not follow from X would not be true. It would mean that the only way to make a connection between two contexts is to figure out how they both relate to X. This would make out picture simpler, but also (I'd argue) less truthful - no matter how important X is for you, you are still thinking about things which have nothing to do with X, so saying that everything follows from X would be for me incomplete at best, and furthermore it is not the point of my little inquiry: here I am more interested in that "everyday world" - the one in which in which nothing is true in general but everything is true in some context (and in which perceiving a statement often involves finding out the context in which it is true).

A system of systems
===
What we have by now is not a logical system a 

