---
category: misc
title: CV
layout: blog
---

Personal Data
==
*(Contacts and stuff)*

**name:** Boris Marinov **age:** 30 **phone number:** +359 883 420029 **e-mail:** marinovboris@gmail.com


Work Experience
==
*(What I do from 9 to 5)* 

Seniour JavaScript Developer - [epam](http://tick42.com/)
--
**from:** November 2015
**to:** Now

*epam partners with the world’s leading companies to imagine, design, and engineer software and customer experiences that transform businesses..*

* I work on the front-end layer of a large currency-trading system. I develop new functionality, migrate legacy modules using new technologies and work closely with a team of product owners, designers, and business analysts, in developing every aspect of the product.

Lead JavaScript Developer - [Tick42](http://tick42.com/)
--
**from:** September 2013 
**to:** November 2015

*Tick42 delivers real-time trading software to some of the world’s largest investment banks and hedge funds.*

* Designed and implemented Tick42 AGM - a WebSocket-based RPC and connectivity library which runs on both **browser** and **node.js**.
* Designed and implemented Config Manager Workbench - A user interface for a **MongoDB**-based configuration storage service which generates UI-s for editing entries with arbitrary schema, and supports several modes of data representation. 
* Completed several **client projects** for major European financial institutions.
* **Supervise** the work of several junior JavaScript Developers.

Technical Writer - [Prosyst Labs](http://www.prosyst.com/)
--
**from:** November 2011 
**to:** September 2013 

*ProSyst offers a OSGi-based middleware solutions for the Internet of Things.*

* **Document API-s** of ProSyst development libraries (English only).
* Write **code examples** on several different programming languages.
* Develop a web-based information portal.

Personal Projects
==
[folktale](https://github.com/origamitower/folktale) 
--
I am a core contributor in this JavaScript library for functional programming.

[evolutionfonts](https://www.behance.net/evolutionfonts/) 
--
One of my hobbies is designing fonts.

Skills
==
Technical
-------------------
**operating systems:** Windows, Linux, OSX
**version control:** git, Mercurial
**build tools:** Grunt, Browserify, Webpack
**languages and platforms:** node.js, ES6, HTML and CSS.
**testing solutions:** nodeunit, QUnit, Sinon
**UI libraries:** React, Kendo UI, bootstrap. 
**misc:** q, lodash, ramda, express.js

Misc
----
* Excellent command of the **English language**.
* Background in **web and graphic design**.
* Strong **communication skills** (I can talk to people and they understand).
* Experience with writing and maintaining software documentation.

Education
==
*(Mostly irrelevant)*

* Bachelor of Public Relations and Mass Communication at **Sofia University “Kliment Ohridski“**
* Studied at Second English Language School “Thomas Jefferson”


