Lambda calculus for programmers.

We've all heard that "those who don't understand UNIX are doomed to reinvent it poorly", but most of us are overlooking the fact that those who don't understand lambda calculus have a much crueler fate --- they are doomed to write code that is ugly and hard to maintain, without ever realizing that they are missing something. Like blind people who don't even know they are blind... But of course we don't need to be so dramatic with the metaphors --- after all, unlike physical senses, such as sight, the senses that we develop for design and engineering are ones that we can always gain, provided that we have some mottivation and the right resource.

What is lambda calculus
===

One of the hard parts about learning UNIX is that it is not obvious what UNIX is, --- it is hard to describe why is it so important, to someone who never used it. You can say that it is an operating system, and IDE, a collection of tools for writing scripts, a design philosophy and you would be equally correct, but also and equally obscure. 

And the "why do I need it" situation is even more severe when it comes to Lambda calculus. I mean, UNIX at least is a *software product*, a version of which is in use today. In contrast, Lambda calculus is some obscure computation model, that was created before computers were a thing, for the purpose proving some mathematical properties of computations. We are lucky that we have LISP a language based on Lambda calculus, else most of the knowledge about Lambda calculus may have been long forgotten.

In this tutorial, we wouldn't involve LISP, but would involve a subset of JavaScript, that can contain just arrow functions (which are known as lambda expressions). 

More formally, each program in this language is an *expression*. And an expression be one of the three things:
1. A **<variable>**, the syntax of which is any word, such as `a`, `b`, `c`, `foo`, `bar`...
2. An arrow function **<definition>**: `(<variable>) => <expression>`
2. An arrow function **<application>**: `<function>(<expression>)`

In other words, we leave behind *assignment*. all *datatypes*, both primitive (`string`, `number` etc) and composite (`Map`, `Array`...). Untill we are left with just arrow functions *AND* we also leave behind most of the features of arrow functions as well. We only use, functions that have *just one expression* (no curly braces).

So, for example:

```
(a) => a
```

is a lambda expression, and stuff like

```
var a = 5
```

```
(a) => {b(); return a}
```

are not.

By the way, the original syntax of the last expression is 

```
λa.a
```

Named functions and multiple argument functions.
---

Now, the original Lambda calculus doesn't allow for you to give a names to your functions and reuse them later. However, here we will use named functions in this tutorial, and we will keep in mind that if you want to you can always replace all instances of the name of the function with its definition, to get a canonical lambda expression, e.g. 
```
id = (a) => a

id(id(b))
```

becomes:

```
((a) => a)((a) => a)(a)

```

Same with producing functions that take more than one argument --- the canonical Lambda calculus doesn't have them, because they are not needed, but they can be easily simulated by curried functions:

And you can think of:

```
ap = (a, b) => a(b)

ap(x, y)

```
as a syntactic sugar for

```
(a) => (b) => a(b)(x)(y)
```

Integers
===

Now, after we saw what Lambda calculus is, the time has come to it for a spin. But how would we do that without any datatypes? We will need a way to represent integers using only functions. Luckily a guy called Peano has got us covered --- if we have a the integer zero and the function `successor` or `plusOne` we can get any integer that we want.

```
zero = (successor, zero) => zero
one = (successor, zero) => successor(zero)
two = (successor, zero) => successor(successor(zero))
three = (successor, zero) => successor(successor(zero))
```

We can parse the values of these integers into normal JS integers with the following (non-lambda) function.

```
parseInt = (int) => int(0, (a) => a + 1)
```

