The case against boolean thinking
===

In my last post about generality, I wanted to show how our ambition to discover ideas that are all-encompassing and eternal makes our whole world view crumble, leaving us unable to think clearly even about very simple issues with obvious solutions. Today I want to talk about instance of the same thing, in a way that is simpler and more direct. You can think of this essay as a prequel to the longer essay "[When universality breaks](/universal-knowledge/)".

What is boolean thinking
===

Every time someone asks you a yes/no question, you are being cohersed into accepting a thinking pattern that we will call *boolean, thinking*. The word "boolean" here is used in the sense of the boolean datatype in logic and programming - it is a type that is inhabited by just two values, which we call *true* and *false*. By boolean thinking, I am refering to the precondition that every statement should necessarily be categorized as either true or false.

"But every statement *is* either true or false." some of us might object. This principle might not be entirely false, but it is also not entirely true (badum-ts). 

Context is key. Depending on the context can be:

* *Unknown/unknowable*  (if the context is incomplete).

* It can be *senseless* (not every question is meaningful). 

* In instances where the context varies, a statement can be *both true and false*. 

You are probably aware of all those situations, but you still don't think that they contradict the boolean doctrine (as we shall see later boolean thinking is exactly that - a doctrine). Boolean thinking is a mode of thinking which, although not universally valid, is very helpful in most occasions e.g. you cannot make plans for tonight with someone who says that there is 40% chance they are going out, or who cannot answer the question whether they are going out, or they say that it does not make sense for them. For this reason you might be tempted to dub all imperfections of the boolean model as imperfections of the world, and the thinking agents:


1. No statement is *unknown/unknowable* - somewhere out there there is an answer.

2. No statement is *senseless*, all statements can be interpreted, given enough effort.

3. A statement is *both true and false* only because one does not know enough to give a definite answer.

I diagnose people who have such symptoms as having serious case of *boolean thinking*. But the decease is entirely curable, provided that you understand its cause. And, as I mentioned, the cause of boolean thinking always has to do with the question of *context*, as in general, *the context* of which a statement is expressed matters for its "evaluation" to true and false

1. Each statement can *be true in one context and false in another one*.  
2. Every statement is senseless when presented *without context*, 
3. Every statement is unknown when the context is *incomplete.*

The case against boolean thinking 
===

We established that the truth or falsity of a statement is always determined by its context i.e. by the statements that we accept as true or false in order to justify it. So boolean thinking is possible only if we agree on some universal context (or a universal set of statements that are true) based on which we can evaluate every statement. 

Note that aside from being universal (valid for all statements) this doctrine has to also be *all-encompassing* (relevant for every statement) in order for the logic to be valid, i.e. boolean logic is possible only under what is called *authoritarian doctrine*, although the phrase "authoritarian doctrines" is somewhat deceiving, because it isn't the doctrines themselves that are authoritarian, but the role they play in people's thinking patterns. 

So, while boolean logic may be splendid when viewed by itself, when viewed in relation to the "real world" there is a huge issue with it, the namely that *no logical framework is strong enough to capture the things that we usually want to dissect*, (the real world if we must.) Proving the claim above is a subject of a different text, for now it suffices to say that although it may not look logical or scientific, it is, however, very strongly backed up by both logic and science. So strongly, that it is more appropriate to ask what makes us think the reverse, that the real world may be captured by a boolean logical framework - I'd argue that the thought that it can be is an instance of the so called "is-ought fallacy" --- the idea that something is true just because it will be good for us that it is true. 

Now, we are ready to make the case against boolean logic: 

**Because boolean logic overlooks the importance of context (that each proposition can be true in one context, false in another, and also neither true nor false, and senseless in another) it inspires dichotomous thinking, also known as black-and-white thinking. **

i.e. boolean logic is fit for a world where there is a single unifying and also complete framework... a universal set of axioms. But that is not our world. Our world is a place where we constantly have to compare different frameworks and, different sets of axioms, which are all incomplete (here is the place where I should reference Godel's theorem, but I am not going to do it, as it is too cliche, (pardon my lack of diacritics))....

When we encounter an event or a situation that does not obey a our boolean framework of choice, they have two courses of action that we can take:

1. Pretend that it didn't happen, (or try to alter our perception of it to fit it there).
2. Declare that "the world is not logical" and stop making sense of it.

In contrast, thinking in a non-boolean manner allows for many different frameworks to co-exist in a way that is not diminutive to any of them. 

Non-boolean thinking
===

Criticising anything would be (nearly) pointless, if you don't present the alternatives, and I will do my best to do just that. Most people are aware of non-classical logics, but they are largely regarded as exotic curiosities, rather than real alternatives to traditional boolean logic. There is, however, a branch of non-boolen logic, called *intuitionistic* or constructive logic, that is getting increasingly more popular and relevant to many areas of research. It is, for example, the logic that is at the heart of the so called "proof assistants", such as Lean.

Rather than the concept of true/false, intuitionistic logic is based on the concept of a "proof". In contrast with classical logic where a proof is mainly a *process*, in intuitionistic logic a proof is an *object*, a construction that guarantees that a given statement is true. 

As we said, each proof is based on a context i.e. a set of premises, proofs that we assume that exist. So, when thinking intuitionistically, the first thing we ask, before we get to evaluating any statement, is "What is the context?" i.e. "Give us the set of premises from which we are operating." 

Then, we proceed to, by manipulating the proofs of the premises, to construct a proof of our statement. 

You might say that this is much like "normal" logic. And the fact is that it makes us pay much more attention to the context. If we start paying attention, we would observe that, instead of 2 (true/false), there are 3 basic cases when trying to construct a prove of a given statement:

1. We might be able to construct a proof that the statement is *true*.
2. We might be able to construct a proof that it is *false*.
3. We might not be able to construct neither proofs (the statement would neither be true nor false).

(Yes, in a perfect world, where we know everything, we would be able to prove or disprove every statement that we can formulate, but not in *this* world. 

And with that realization, we are free from the boolean prison!

For more info about intuitionistic logic, check my book [Category Theory Illustrated](/category-theory-illustrated/05_logic/)

Addendum: Boolean thinking, authoritarianism and propaganda
===

My point of bashing boolean thinking is not strictly an academic one. I actually think that the way we think about logic influences the way we think about everything else and ultimately the way we live. What I call "boolean thinking" in the field of logic, has many different names in other fields. In the field of philosophy, it's called "Platonism". In the field of politics, it is deeply connected to authoritarianism. 

The second point is important. You might define authoritarian ideologies in many ways, but the key thing about them is that are based on a doctrine on which all people must abide to, in their thinking and a doctrine is much like a context, a set of premises. The power of authoritarian rulers is based on the way in which they limit the things that people can think and say: rulers define what the premises are and from then on, then you are "free" to make the conclusions yourself. To rephrase Orwell's famous slogan:

> "Who controls the premises, controls the conclusions"

Authoritarian regimes also rely on propaganda, and many propaganda techniques use boolean thinking, the idea that if something does not follow to be true from the premises is necessary false (black and white thinking). Or that one of two things is necessary true (false dichotomies).
